Assignment 2  Page 1 

DATABASE SYSTEMS 

ASSIGNMENT 2 
NOTES 

❑ Students should read everything presented below carefully. 
❑ This assignment 2 is worth 15% of the overall grade. 
❑ This assignment is on relational DBMS. 
❑ Appropriate softwares can be used to support your implementation. 
❑ Plagiarism must be avoided. Otherwise, zero mark is given.  
❑ Each student must take part in all parts of assignment 2: 

❑ Part 1.1: Create table 
❑ Part 1.2: Insert data 
❑ Part 2: Store procedure, function, trigger 
❑ Part 3: Building application 

 
 

PART 1: CREATE DATABASE (3.5 points) 

I. Create table (2 points) 

Write DDL statements to implement your database into the physical database. Students should 

indentify data types, data length, and constraints based on the business description, EERD and 

relational database schema in Assignment 1. 
 

Note: Your database must include following constraints: 

● Primary key 

● Auto increment primary key 

▪ Primary key with a  given prefix and auto incremental values. Ex: EMP0001, EMP0002,… 

● Foreign key constraint 

● Unique constraint, Not null constraint, Default constraint 

▪ Row-based constraint relating to one or two columns. Ex: Dnumber must be in [1,20], check-in 

datetime must be earlier than check-out datetime 

 

II. Insert (1.5 points) 

Insert data for all tables in the database. 

Note: The data in tables must be meaningful, and 3/4 tables have at least 4 rows.  
 

NOTE: Each group needs to create a script for part 1. This script can be executed 

without any error to create a complete database. 

Practice: Database system – S241 



Assignment 2  Page 2 

PART  2: STORE PROCEDURE, FUNCTION, TRIGGER (3 points) 

I. Function/ Store Procedure (2 points) 

Write at least 2 functions and 2 store procedures to query data or perform some calculations/ 

operations. Please specify the input and output of these functions and store procedures in your report. 

Note: Procedures and functions must be meaningful for your topic and all of the following must be used in 

at least 1 procedure/function: 

● Query with WHERE and ORDER BY clauses from two or more tables 

● Input parameter used in WHERE (or HAVING) clause 

● AGGREATE FUNCTION, GROUP BY, HAVING 

● IF or FOR statement  

● Validation of input parameters 

II. Trigger (1 point) 

Write at least 2 triggers to invoke operations automatically in response to INSERT, UPDATE, and 

DELETE statements on tables.  

Note:  

● At least 1 trigger to generate derived column values 

● At least 1 trigger to enforce business rules that are meaningful for your topic. Ex: The salary of 

a department manager must be higher than the other employees who work for that 

department. 

 

PART 3: BUILDING APPLICATIONS (3.5 points) 

Build an application with the following requirements: 

- Programming environment: optional (desktop application or web application).  

- Programming language: optional.  

- The application connects to the database created in Part 1 and Part 2.  

- Display the data on the form and perform the requirement below.  (Do not need to implement all the 

description in Assignment 1) 

- Students need to prepare data, scripts to demo the application when reporting. 
 

I. Create user (0.5 point) 

Log in to the database with DBA privileges, create a user named sManager and assign all access 

rights to this user. 
 

II. Implement features (3 points) 

1. Log in, log out (enter the user name/password for sManager account to log in/out).  (0.5 point) 

 

Practice: Database system – S241 



Assignment 2  Page 3 

 

2. Log in to the user sManager and do the following:  

a. View, Insert, Delete, Update information of an object (1 point). Ex: View, Insert, Delete, 

Update detail information of an employee.  

Note:  

● At least one screen relating to two or more tables in DB 

● Students have to validate input data 

● Error message must be clearly 

b. Retrieve list of objects (1 point). Ex: Retrieve all products of the company. Users can 

delete an object, view details of an object or create a new object from this screen (you 

can reuse screens in 2a). Besides, filter and sort features must be allowed. 

c. One feature that calls a store procedure/function of Part 2 (0.5 point). Ex: Display 

monthy revenue of each month in a year. 

 

III. Bonus (1 point) 

- The user interface is attractive and friendly. (0.5 point) 

- Building a data model (in MVC architecture) to communicate with databases. (0.5 point) 

 

SUBMISSION & PRESENTATION 

All teams have to submit a hard copy report and present your work to me on Sat 07th Dec 2024 

(Week 49) 

The team leader submits your work (soft copy) to LMS with only one single zip file. The zip file may 

contain resources as follows: 

● Report (word or PDF) contains team member list 

● SQL Script 

● Source code 

● Other supporting files (if any) 

 

 

 

------------------------------------------- GOOD LUCK! -----------------------------------------  

Practice: Database system – S241